# Javascript (JS)

## What is JS?

JavaScript (JS) is a programming language that allows implementation of complex things on web pages. Every time a web page does more than just sit there and display static information for the user to look at—displaying timely content updates, interactive maps, animated 2D/3D graphics, scrolling video jukeboxes, or more—you can bet that JavaScript is probably involved.

JS is a lightweight, interpreted, object-oriented language with functions, and is best known as the scripting language for Web pages, but it's used in many non-browser environments as well  both on user machines and servers. Contrary to popular misconception, JS is not "Interpreted Java". In a nutshell, JavaScript is a dynamic scripting language supporting prototype based object construction. The basic syntax is intentionally similar to both Java and C++ to reduce the number of new concepts required to learn the language. Language constructs, such as if statements, for and while loops, and switch and try ... catch blocks function the same as in these languages (or nearly so).

## JS Structure

### Embed or Include

JS can either embed the code directly inside an HTML file, or can be placed in a line in the HTML file that will point to the external JavaScript file. In most cases the latter is recommended.

In order to do that we add the *script* opening and closing tags. Between the two is where JS code resides.

### Output

The first is how to interact with the JS code running in the browser. There are a number of ways JavaScript can display text for the user (output). They are:

- Alert: The most simple one is by using the alert function which shows a pop-up in the browser with the text. The alert() function is actually rarely used, but it is an easy way to use JS.
[ALERT](https://code-maven.com/try/examples/js/alert.html)
- document.write: JavaScript code uses the document.write function to change the content of a page. This function was often used when one wanted to change what's shown. Today, there are some more advanced techniques.
- console.log: Most web browsers provide what is called a "JS console". It is an additional window which is normally not visible, where the browser can print out warnings and errors generated by the execution of JS code. (E.g. if there is a syntax error in the code.) In order to see the console it needs to be opened. On Mac with Chrome it can be opened by using: Command-Option-J. In Windows Chrome Console Log can be opened with CTRL-SHIFT-I.

### Input

A selector is simply the element to be styled. But selectors aren't just elements. They could be attributes, pseudo-classes, ids, classes, and descendants. Here are some examples of selectors:

- Universal: indiated by an asterisk. This selector affects every single element on the document tree.
- Element: the most common selector, and it involves targeting members of a particular element when that element is defined. Examples include p, h2, footer, etc.
- Classes & IDs: defined in the HTML and earmarked in the CSS using '.' (for classes) and '#' (for IDs). They target HTML elements with specific class or ID names.
- Pseudo-Classes: are classes that are based on their state. Their state is also a response to user actions. Pseudo-classes do not stand alone on their own. They are attached to other selectors, followed immediately by a colon, then state. Hover, visited, before and active are common pseudo-classes.

## How To Insert CSS

There are three ways of inserting a style sheet:

- External CSS: With an external style sheet, you can change the look of an entire website by changing just one file! Each HTML page must include a reference to the external style sheet file inside the *link* element, inside the head section.
- Internal CSS: An internal style sheet may be used if one single HTML page has a unique style. The internal style is defined inside the *style* element, inside the head section.
- Inline CSS: An inline style may be used to apply a unique style for a single element. To use inline styles, add the style attribute to the relevant element. The style attribute can contain any CSS property.

References:

- [Javascript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)
- [Introduction to JavaScript - basic output](https://code-maven.com/introduction-to-javascript)
- [JavaScript input with prompt and confirm](https://code-maven.com/javascript-input-with-prompt-and-confirm)
- [JavaScript Variables](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp)

### Return

[Home Page](README.md)
